of benjamin franklin chapter 2.
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings are in the public
domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit
librivox.org the autobiography
of benjamin franklin edited by frank
woodworth pine chapter 2
beginning life as a printer
from a child i was fond of reading and
all the little money that came into my
hands
was ever laid out in books pleased with
the
pilgrim's progress my first collection
was of john bunyan's works
in separate little volumes i afterwards
sold them to enable me to buy
r burton's historical collections
they were small chapman's books
and cheap 40 or 50 in all
my father's little library consisted
chiefly of books in polemic divinity
most of which i read and have since
often regretted that
at a time when i had such a thirst for
knowledge
more proper books had not fallen in my
way
since it was now resolved i should not
be a clergyman
plutarch's lives there was in which i
read
abundantly and i still think that time
spent to great advantage there was also
a book of defoes
called an essay on projects and another
of dr mathers
called essays to do good which perhaps
gave me a turn of thinking
that had an influence on some of the
principal future events of my life
this bookish inclination at length
determined my father to make me
a printer though he had already one son
james of that profession in 1717 my
brother james returned from england with
a press
and letters to set up his business in
boston
i liked it much better than that of my
father but still had a hankering for the
sea
to prevent the apprehended effect of
such an inclination
my father was impatient to have me bound
to my brother
i stood out some time but at last was
persuaded
and signed the indentures when i was yet
but 12 years old
i was to serve as an apprentice till i
was 21 years of age
only i was to be allowed journeyman's
wages during the last year
in a little time i made great
proficiency in the business
and became a useful hand to my brother i
now had access to better books
and acquaintance with the apprentice of
booksellers
enabled me sometimes to borrow a small
one which i was careful to return
soon and clean often i sat up in my room
reading
the greatest part of the night when the
book was borrowed in the evening
and to be returned early in the morning
least it should be missed
or wanted after some time an ingenious
tradesman
mr matthew adams who had a pretty
collection of books
and who frequented our printing house
took notice of me
invited me to his library and very
kindly
lent me such books as i chose to read i
now took a fancy to poetry
and made some little pieces my brother
thinking it might turn to account
encouraged me and put me on composing
occasional ballads
one was called the lighthouse tragedy
and contained an account of the drowning
of captain
worthy lake with his two daughters the
other
was a sailor song on the taking of teach
or blackbeard the pirate they were
wretched stuff in the grub street ballad
style
and when they were printed he sent me
out to the town to sell them
the first sold wonderfully the event
being
recent having made a great noise
this flattered my vanity but my father
discouraged me by ridiculing my
performances
and telling me verse makers were
generally beggars
so i escaped being a poet most probably
a very bad one
but as prose riding has been of great
use to me in the course of my life
and was a principal means of my
advancement i shall now
tell you how in such a situation i
acquired what little ability i have in
that way
there was another bookish lad in the
town john collins by name
with whom i was intimately acquainted we
sometimes disputed and very
fond we were of argument and very
desirous of
confusing one another with disputatious
turn
by the way is apt to become a very bad
habit
making people often extremely
disagreeable in company
by the contradiction that is necessary
to bring it into practice
and thence besides souring and spoiling
the conversation
is productive of disgusts and perhaps
enmities where you may have occasion for
friendship
i had caught it by reading my father's
books of dispute about religion
persons of good sense i have since
observed seldom fall into it
except lawyers university men and men of
all sorts that have been bred at
edinboro
a question was once somehow or other
started between collins and me of the
propriety of educating the female sex in
learning
and their abilities for study he was of
the opinion that it was improper
and that they were naturally unequal to
it i took the contrary side
perhaps a little for the dispute's sake
he was naturally more eloquent
and had already plenty of words and
sometimes as i thought
bore me down more by his fluency than by
the strength of his reasons
as we parted without settling the point
and were
not to see one another again for some
time i sat down to put my arguments in
writing
which i copied fair and sent to him he
answered and i replied
three or four letters of aside had
passed when my father happened to find
my papers
and read them without entering into the
discussion he took occasion to talk to
me
about the manner of my writing observed
that
though i had the advantage of my
antagonist in correct
spelling and pointing which i owed to
the printing house
i fell far short in elegance of
expression in method
and in persecuting of which he convinced
me by several instances
i saw the justice of his remarks and
hence grew more attentive to the manner
in writing
and determined to endeavor at
improvement
about this time i met with an odd volume
of the spectator
it was the third i had never before seen
any of them i bought it read it over and
over and was much delighted with it
i thought the writing excellent and
wished if possible to imitate it
with this view i took some of the papers
and making short hints of the sentiment
in each sentence laid them by a few days
and then without looking at the book
tried to complete the papers again
by expressing each hinted sentiment at
length
and as fully as it had been expressed
before
in any subtle words which should come to
hand then i compared my spectator with
the original
discovered some of my faults and
corrected them but i found i wanted a
stock of words
or a readiness in recollecting and using
them
which i thought i should have acquired
before that time
if i had gone on making verses since the
continual occasion for words
of the same import but of different
length to suit the measure
or of different sound for the rhyme
would have laid me under a constant
necessity
of searching for variety and also have
tended to fix that variety in my mind
and make me master of it therefore i
took some of the tales and turned them
into verse
and after a time when i had pretty well
forgotten the pros
turned them back again i also sometimes
jumbled my collections of hints into
confusion and after some weeks
endeavored
to reduce them into the best order
before i began to form the full
sentences and
complete the paper this was to teach me
method
in the arrangement of thoughts by
comparing my work afterwards
with the original i discovered many
faults and amended them
but i sometimes had the pleasure of
fancying that
in certain particulars of small import i
had been lucky enough to improve the
method of the language
and this encouraged me to think i might
possibly in time come to be a tolerable
english writer of which i was extremely
ambitious
my time for these exercises and for
reading
was at night after work or before it
began
in the morning or on sundays when i
contrived to be in the printing house
alone
evading as much as i could the common
attendance on pulpit worship
which my father used to extract of me
when i was under his care
and which indeed i still thought a duty
though i could not as it seemed to me
afford time
to practice it a daily london journal
comprising satirical essays on social
subjects
published by addison and steele in 1711
and 1712 the spectator
and its predecessor the tattler 1709
marked the beginning of periodical
literature when about 16 years of age
i happened to meet with a book written
by one try on
recommending a vegetable diet i
determined to go
into it my brother being yet unmarried
did not keep house
but boarded himself and his apprentices
in another family
my refusing to eat flesh occasion then
inconveniency
and i was frequently chided for my
singularity
i made myself acquainted with tyrone's
manner of preparing some of his dishes
such as boiling potatoes or rice making
hasty pudding
and a few others and then proposed to my
brother that if he would give me
weekly half the money he paid for my
board
i would board myself he instantly agreed
to it
and i presently found that i could save
half of what he paid me
this was an additional fund for buying
books but i had another advantage in it
my brother and the rest going from the
printing house to their meals
i remained there alone and dispatching
presently my light repast
which often was no more than a biscuit
or a slice of bread
a handful of raisins or a tart from the
pastry cooks
and a glass of water had the rest of the
time till their return for study
in which i made the greatest progress
for that greater
clearness of head and quicker
apprehension
which usually attended temperance in
eating and drinking
and now it was being on some occasion
made ashamed of my
ignorance and figures which i had twice
failed in learning when at school
i took crocker's book of arithmetic and
went through
the whole by myself with great ease i
also read
seller and shemi's book of navigation
and became
acquainted with the little geometry they
contained
but never proceeded farther in that
science and i read about this time
lock on human understanding and the art
of thinking
by monsieur dupont royal john locke
1632-1704 a celebrated english
philosopher
founder of the so-called common ascents
school of philosophers
he drew up a constitution for the
colonists of carolina
a noted society of scholarly and devout
men occupying the abbey of
port royal near paris who published
learned books
among the one here referred to better
known
as the port royal logic while i was
intended on improving my language i met
with an english grammar
i think it was green woods at the end of
which there were two little sketches
of the arts of rhetoric and logic the
latter
finishing with a specimen of a dispute
with the socratic method
and soon after i procured xenophon's
memorable things of socrates
wherein there are many instances of the
same method i was charmed with it
adopted it dropped my abrupt
contradiction and positive argumentation
and put on the humble inquirer and
doubter and being then
from reading shaftsberry and collins
become
a real doubter in many points of our
religious doctrine
i found this method safest for myself
and very embarrassing to those against
whom i used it
therefore i took a delight in it
practiced it continually
and grew very artful and expert in
drawing people
even of superior knowledge into
concessions the consequence of which
they did not foresee entangling them in
difficulties
out of which they could not extricate
themselves and so obtaining victories
that neither myself nor my cause always
deserved
i continued this method some few years
but gradually left it
retaining only the habit of expressing
myself in terms
of modest diffidence never using when i
advanced anything that may possibly be
disputed
the words certainly undoubtedly
or any others that gave an error of
positiveness
to an opinion but rather say i conceive
or apprehend a thing to be so and
so it appears to me or i should think it
so or so for such and such reasons
or i imagine it to be so
or it is so if i am not mistaken
this habit i believe has been of great
advantage to me
when i have had occasion to inculcate my
opinions
and persuade men into measures that i
have been from time to time engaged
in promoting and as the chief ends of
conversation are to
inform or to be informed to please
or to persuade i wish well-meaning
sensible men
would not lessen their power of doing
good by a positive
assuming manner that seldom fails to
disgust
tends to create opposition and to defeat
everyone of those purposes for which
speech was given to us
to wit giving or receiving information
or pleasure
for if you would inform a positive and
dogmatical manner
in advancing your sentiments may provoke
contradiction and prevent a candid
attention
if you wish information and improvement
from the knowledge of others and yet at
the same time
express yourself as firmly fixed in your
present opinion
modest sensible men who do not love
disputation
will probably leave you undisturbed in
the possession
of your error and by such a manner you
can seldom hope to recommend yourself
in pleasing pope says judiciously
men should be taught as if you taught
them not
and things unknown prospered as things
forgot
further recommending to us to speak
those sure
with seeming diffidence and he might
have coupled with this line
that which he has coupled with another i
think less properly
for want of modesty is want of sense if
you ask
why less properly i must repeat the
lines
immodest words admit of no defense for
want of modesty
is want of sense now is not want of
sense
wherein a man is so unfortunate as to
want it some apology for his
want of modesty and would not the lines
stand more justly thus immodest words
admit
but this defense the want of modesty
is want of sense this however i submit
to better judgments
socrates confuded his opponents in an
argument by asking questions so
skillfully devised
that the answers would confirm the
questioner's position
or show the error of the opponent
alexander pope 1688-1744
the greatest english poet of the first
half of the 18th century
my brother had in 1720 or 1721
begun to print a newspaper it was the
second that appeared in america
and was called the new england current
the only one before it was the boston
newsletter
i remember his being dissuaded by some
of his friends
from the undertaking as not likely to
succeed one newspaper being in their
judgment
enough for america at this time 1771
there were not less than 5 and 20. he
went on however with the undertaking
and after having worked in composing the
types and printing off the sheets
i was employed to carry the papers
through the streets to the customers
franklin's memory does not serve him
correctly here
the corent was really the fifth
newspaper established in america
although generally called the fourth
because the first
public occurrences published in boston
in 1690
was suppressed after the first issue
following is the order in which
the other four papers were published
boston newsletter 1704
boston gazette december 21st 1719
the american weekly mercury philadelphia
december 22nd
1719 the new england corinth 1721
he had some ingenious men among his
friends who amused themselves by writing
little pieces for this paper
which gained it credit and made it more
in demand and these gentlemen often
visited us
hearing their conversations and their
account of the approbation
their papers were received with i was
excited to try my hand among them
but being still a boy and suspecting
that my brother would object to printing
anything of mine in his paper
if he knew it to be mine i can try to
disguise my hand
and writing an anonymous paper i put
it in at night under the door of the
printing house
it was found in the morning and
communicated to his writing friends
when they called in as usual they read
it
commented on it in my hearing and i had
the exquisite pleasure of finding it met
with their approbation
and that their different guesses at the
author none were named but men of some
character
among us for learning and ingenuity
i suppose now that i was rather lucky in
my judges
and that perhaps they were not really so
very good ones
as i then esteemed them encouraged
however by this
i wrote and conveyed in the same way to
the press several more papers
which were equally approved and i kept
my secret till my small fund of sense
for such performances was pretty well
exhausted and then i discovered it
when i began to be considered a little
more by my brother's acquaintances
and in a manner that did not quite
please him as he thought probably with
reason
that it tended to make me too vain and
perhaps this might be one occasion
of the differences that we began to have
about this time
though a brother he considered himself
as my master and me as his apprentice
and accordingly expected the same
services from me
as he would from another well i thought
he deemed me
too much in some he required of me who
from a brother expected more indulgence
our disputes were often brought before
our father
and i fancy i was either generally in
the right or else a better pleader
because the judgment was generally in my
favor but my brother was passionate
and had often beaten me which i took
extremely amiss
and thinking my apprenticeship very
tedious
i was continually wishing for some
opportunity of shortening it
which at length offered in a manner
unexpected
one of the pieces in our newspaper on
some political point which i have now
forgotten gave offense to the assembly
he was taken up
censured and imprisoned for a month by
the speaker's warrant
i suppose because he would not discover
his author
i too was taken up and examined before
the council
but though i did not give them any
satisfaction they contended themselves
with admonishing me
and dismissed me considering age perhaps
as an apprentice who was bound to keep
his masters secrets
during my brother's confinement which i
resented a good deal notwithstanding our
private differences
i had the management of the paper and i
made bold to give our rulers some rubs
in it
which my brother took very kindly while
others began to consider me
in an unfavorable light as a young
genius that had a turn for libeling and
satire my brother's discharge was
accompanied
with an order of the house a very odd
one
that james franklin could no longer
print the paper called
the new england corent there was a
consultation held in our printing house
among his friends what should be done in
this case
some proposed to evade the order by
changing the name of the paper
but my brother seeing inconveniences in
that it was finally concluded on as a
better way
to let it be printed for the future
under the name of benjamin franklin
and to avoid the censure of the assembly
that might fall on him
as still printing it by his apprentice
the contrivance was that my old
indenture should be returned to me
with a full discharge on the back of it
to be shown on occasion
but to secure to him the benefits of my
service i was to sign
new indentures for the remainder of the
term which were to be kept
private a very flimsy scheme it was
however
it was immediately executed and the
paper went on accordingly
under my name for several months at
length a fresh difference arising
between my brother and me
i took upon me to assert my freedom
presuming that he would not
venture to produce the new indentures
it was not fair in me to take this
advantage and this i therefore reckoned
one of
the first errata of my life but the
unfairness of it weighed
little with me when under the
impressions of resentment
for the blows his passion too often
urged him
to bestow upon me though he was
otherwise
not an ill-natured man perhaps i was too
saucy and provoking
when he found i would leave him he took
care to prevent my getting employment in
any other printing house of the town
by going around and speaking to every
master who
accordingly refused to give me work i
then
thought of going to new york as the
nearest place
where there was a printer and i was
rather inclined to leave boston
when i reflected that i had already made
myself a little obnoxious
to the governing party and from the
arbitrary proceedings of the assembly
in my brother's case it was likely i
might
if i stayed soon bring myself into
scrapes
and farther that my indiscreet
disputations
about religion began to make me pointed
at
with horror by good people as an infidel
or atheist
i determined on the point but my father
now siding with my brother
i was sensible that if i attempted to go
openly means would be used to prevent me
my friend collins therefore undertook to
manage a little for me
he agreed with the captain of a new york
sloop for my passage
under the notion of my being a young
acquaintance of his so i sold some of my
books to raise a little money
was taken on board privately and as we
had a fair wind
in three days i found myself in new york
near 300 miles from home
a boy of but 17 without the least
recommendation to
or knowledge of any person in the place
and with very little money in my pocket
end of chapter 2. the autobiography of
benjamin franklin
chapter three this is a librivox
recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit
librivox.org the autobiography of
benjamin franklin
edited by frank woodward pine
chapter 3 arrival in philadelphia
my inclinations for the sea were by this
time worn out
or i might now have gratified them but
having a trade and supposing myself a
pretty good workman
i offered my service to the printer in
the place
old mr william bradford who had been the
first printer
in pennsylvania but removed from fence
upon the quarrel of george keith he
could give me no employment having
little to do
and help enough already but says he
my son at philadelphia has lately lost
his principal hand
aquila rose by death if you go through
there
i believe he may employ you philadelphia
was a hundred miles further
i set out however in a boat for amboy
leaving my chest and things to follow me
round by sea in crossing the bay we met
with a squall
that tore our rotten sails to pieces
preventing our getting into the kill
and drove us upon long island in our way
a drunken dutchman who was a passenger
too fell overboard
when he was sinking i reached through
the water to
his shock pate and drew him up so that
we got him
in again his ducking sobered him a
little and he went to sleep
taking first out of his pocket a book
which he desired i would drive for him
it proved to be my old favorite author
bunyan's pilgrim's progress
in dutch finally printed on good paper
with copper cuts
a dress better than i had ever seen it
where in its own language
i have since found that it has been
translated into most of the languages of
europe
and supposed it has been more generally
read than any other book
except perhaps the bible honest john was
the first
that i know of who mixed narration and
dialogue
a method of writing very engaging to the
reader
who in the most interesting parts finds
himself as it were
brought into the company and present at
the discourse
defoe in his crusoe his mall flanders
religious courtship family instructor
and
other pieces has imitated it with
success
and richardson has done the same in his
pamela
etc kill van kill the channel separating
staten island
from new jersey on the north samuel
richardson
the father of the english novel wrote
pamela
clarissa harlow and the history of sir
charles
grandison novels published in the form
of letters
when we drew near the island we found it
was at a place
where there could be no landing there
being a great surf on the stony beach
so we dropped anchor and swung around
towards the shore
some people came down to the water edge
and hollowed to us
as we did to them but the wind was so
high and the surf so loud
that we could not hear so as to
understand each other
there were canoes on the shore and we
made signs and hellowed
that they should fetch us but they
either did not understand us
or thought it impracticable so they went
away and night coming on
we had no remedy but to wait till the
wind should abate
and in the meantime the boatman and i
concluded to sleep
if we could and so crowded into the
scuttle
with the dutchman who was still wet and
the spray beating over the head of our
boat
leaked through to us so that we were
soon almost as wet as he
in this manner we lay all night with
very little rest
but the wind debating the next day we
made a shift to reach amboy before night
having been 30 hours on the water
without victuals or any drink but a
bottle of filthy rum
the water we'd sailed on being salt
in the evening i found myself very
feverish and went to bed
but having read somewhere that cold
water drank plentifully
was good for a fever i followed the
prescription
sweat plentifully most of the night my
fever left me and in the morning
crossing the ferry i proceeded on my
journey
on foot having 50 miles to burlington
where i was told i could find boats that
would carry me the rest of the way
to philadelphia it rained very hard that
day
i was thoroughly soaked and by noon a
good deal tired
so i stopped at a poor inn where i
stayed all night
beginning now to wish that i had never
left home i cut so miserable a figure
too
that i found by some questions asked me
i was suspected to be some runaway
servant
and in danger of being taken up on that
suspicion however i proceeded the next
day
and got in the evening to an end within
eight
or ten miles of burlington kept by one
dr brown
he entered into conversation with me
while i took some refreshment
and finding i had read a little became
very sociable and friendly
our acquaintance continued as long as he
lived he had been i imagine
an itinerant doctor for there was no
town in england
or or country in europe of which he
could not give a very particular account
he had some letters and was ingenious
but much of an
unbeliever and wickedly undertook some
years after
to travesty the bible in a dog real
verse as cotton had done virgil
by this means he set many of the facts
in a very ridiculous light and might
have hurt
weak minds if his work had been
published but it never was
at his house i lay that night and the
next morning reached burlington
but had the mortification to find the
regular boats were gone a little before
my coming
and no other expected to go before
tuesday this being saturday wherefore
i returned to an old woman in the town
of whom i had brought gingerbread to eat
on the water
and asked her advice she invited me to
lodge at her house until a passage by
water could offer
and being tired with my foot traveling i
accepted the invitation
she understanding i was a printer would
have had me stay at that town and follow
my business
being ignorant of the stock necessary to
begin with
she was very hospitable gave me a dinner
of ox cheek
and great good will accepting only a pot
of ale in return
and i thought myself fixed till tuesday
should come
however walking in the evening by the
side of the river
a boat came by which i found was going
towards philadelphia
with several people in her they took me
in and as there was no wind we rode all
the way
and about midnight not having yet seen
the city
some of the company were confident we
must have passed it and would grow no
further
the others knew not where we were so we
were put toward the shore
got into a creek landed near an old
fence with the rails of which
we made a fire that night being cold
in october and there we remained till
daylight
then one of the company knew the place
to be cooper's creek
a little above philadelphia which we saw
as soon as we got out of the creek
and arrived there about eight or nine
o'clock on the sunday morning
and landed at the market street wharf
i have been the most particular in this
description of my journey
and shall be so if my first entry into
that city
that you may in your mind compare such
unlikely beginnings
with the future i have since made there
i was in my working dress
my best clothes being to come round by
sea i was dirty from my journey
my pockets were stuffed out with shirts
and stockings
and i knew no soul nor where to look for
lodging
i was fatigued with traveling rowing and
want of rest
i was very hungry and my whole stock of
cash consisted of a dutch dollar
and about a shilling in copper the
latter i gave the people of the boat
for my passage who at first refused it
on account of my rowing
but i insisted on their taking it a man
being sometimes more generous when he
has but a little money
than when he has plenty perhaps though
fear of being thought of
to have but little then i walked up the
street
gazing about till near the market house
i met a boy with bread
i had made many a meal on bread and
inquiring where he got
it i went immediately to the bakers he
directed me to in 2nd street
and asked for biscuit intending such as
we had in boston
but they it seems were not made in
philadelphia
then i asked for a threeprenny loaf and
was told they had
none such so not considering or knowing
the difference of money
and the greater cheapness nor the names
of his bread
i obeyed him give me three pennyworth of
any sort
he gave me accordingly three great puffy
rolls
i was surprised at the quantity but took
it and having no room in my pockets
walked off with a roll under each arm
and eating the other thus i made up
market street as far as fourth street
passing by the door of mr reed my future
wife's father
when she standing at the door saw me and
thought
i made as i certainly did a most awkward
ridiculous appearance
then i turned and went down chestnut
street and part of walnut street
eating my roll all the way and coming
around i found myself again at market
street wharf
near the boat i came in to which i went
for a draft of river water
and being filled with one of my roles
gave the other two to a woman and her
child
that came down the river in the boat
with us and were waiting
to go farther thus refreshed i walked
again
up the street which by this time had
many clean dressed people in it
and who were all walking the same way i
joined them and thereby was led to the
great meetinghouse of the quakers
near the market i sat down among them
and after looking around
a while and hearing nothing said being
very drowsy through labor and want of
rest the preceding night
i fell fast asleep and continued so till
the meeting broke up
when one was kind enough to rouse me
this was therefore
the first house i was in or slept in in
philadelphia
walking down again toward the street and
looking in the faces of people
i met a young quaker man whose
continents i liked and accosted him
requesting he would tell me where a
stranger could get lodging
we were then near the sign of the three
mariners here says he
is one place that entertains strangers
but it is not a reputable house
if they will walk with me i'll show thee
a better
he brought me to the crooked billet in
water street
where i got a dinner and while i was
eating it several sly questions were
asked me
as it seemed to be suspected from my
youth in appearance that i might be some
runaway
after dinner my sleepiness returned and
being shown to a bed i lay down without
undressing and slept till six in the
evening
was called to supper went to bed again
very early and slept sound till next
morning
then i made myself as tidy as i could
and went to andrew bradford the printers
i found in the shop the old man his
father whom i had seen in new york
and who traveling on horseback had got
to philadelphia before me
he introduced me to his son who received
me civilly gave me a breakfast
but told me he did not at present want a
hand being lately supplied
with one but there was another printer
in town lately set up
one timer who perhaps might employ me
if not i should be welcome to lodge at
his house and he would give me a little
work to do now and then
tell fuller business should offer the
old gentleman said he would go with me
to the new printer
and when we found him neighbor says
bradford i have brought to see you a
young man of your business
perhaps you may want such a one he asked
me a few questions put
a composing stick in my hand to see how
i worked and then said he would employ
me soon
though he had just then nothing for me
to do and
taking old bradford whom he had never
seen before
to be one of the town's people that had
a good will for him
entered into a conversation on his
present undertaking and prospects
while bradford not discovering that he
was the other printer's father
on kymer's saying he expected soon to
get the greatest part
of the business into his own hands drew
him on by artful questions
and starting little doubts to explain
all his views
what interest he relied on and in what
manner he intended to proceed
i who stood by and heard all saw
immediately that one of them was a
crafty old
sophister and the other a mere novice
bradford left me with kymer who was
greatly surprised when i told him who
the old man was
kymer's printing house i found consisted
of an old shattered press
and one small worn out font of english
which he was using himself
composing an elegy on aquila rose before
mentioned
an ingenious young man of excellent
character much respected in the town
clerk of the assembly and a pretty poet
kymer made verses too
but very indifferently he could not be
said to write them
for his manner was to compose them in
the types directly out of his head
so there being no copy but one pair of
cases
and the elegy likely to require all the
letter
no one could help him i endeavored to
put his press
which he had not yet used and of which
he understood nothing
into order fit to be worked with and
promised
to come and print off his elegy as soon
as he should have got it ready
i returned to bradford's who gave me a
little job to do for the present
and there i lodged and dieted a few days
after
kymer sent for me to print off the elegy
and now he had got another pair of cases
and a pamphlet to reprint on which he
set me
to work these two printers i found
poorly qualified for their business
bradford had not been bred to it and was
very illiterate
and kymer though something of a scholar
was a mere compositor
knowing nothing of press work he had
been one of the french
prophets and could act their
enthusiastic agitations
at the time he did not profess any
particular religion
but something of all on occasion was
very ignorant of the world
and had as i afterward found a good deal
of the nave
in his composition he did not like my
lodging at bradford's while i worked
with him
he had a house indeed but without
furniture
so he could not lodge me but he got me a
logic at mr reed's before mentioned
who was the owner of this house and my
chest and clothes being come by this
time i made rather a more respectable
appearance in the eyes of miss reed
than i had done when she first happened
to see me eating my roll in the street
protestants of the south of france who
became fanatical under the persecutions
of louis xiv and though they had
the gift of prophecy as they had mottos
no taxes and liberty of conscience
i began to have some acquaintance among
the young people of the town
that were lovers of reading with whom i
spent my evenings
very pleasantly and gained money by my
industry and frugality
i lived very agreeably for getting
boston as much as i could
and not desiring that any there should
know where i resided
except my friend collins who was in my
street and
kept it when i wrote to him at length an
incident happened that sent me back
again much sooner than i had intended
i had a brother-in-law robert holmes
master of a sloop
that traded between boston and delaware
he being at newcastle 40 miles below
philadelphia
heard thereof me and wrote me a letter
mentioning the concerns of my friends in
boston
at my abrupt departure assuring me of
their good will to me
and that everything would be
accommodated to my mind if i would
return
to which he exhorted me very earnestly
i wrote an answer to this letter thanked
him for his advice
but stated that my reasons for quitting
boston fully and
in such a light as to convince him i was
not
so wrong as he had apprehended
end of chapter three
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
chapter three
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings are in the public
domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit
librivox.org the autobiography of
benjamin franklin edited by frank
woodworth pine chapter 4
first visit to boston sir william keith
governor of the province
was then at newcastle and captain holmes
happening to be in company with him
when my letter came to hand spoke to him
of me
and showed him the letter the governor
read it and seemed surprised when he was
told
my age he said i appeared a young man of
promising parts
and therefore should be encouraged the
printers of philadelphia were wretched
ones
and if i could set up there he made no
doubt i should succeed
for his part he would procure me the
public business
and do me every other service in his
power
this my brother-in-law afterwards told
me in boston
but i knew as yet nothing of it when one
day
kymer and i being at work together near
the window
we saw the governor and another
gentleman which proved to be colonel
french
of newcastle finally dressed come
directly across the street to our house
and heard them at the door kymer ran
down immediately
thinking it a visit to him but the
governor inquired for me
came up and with a condescension and
politeness i had been quite unused to
made me many compliments desired to be
acquainted with me
blamed me kindly for not having made
myself known to him
when i first came to the place and would
have me away with him to
the tavern where he was going with
colonel french
to taste as he said some excellent
madeira
i was not a little surprised and kymer
stared
like a pig poisoned i went however with
the governor and colonel french to a
tavern
at the corner of third street and over
the madeira
he proposed my setting up my business
laid before me the probabilities of
success
and both he and colonel french assured
me i
should have their interest and influence
in procuring the public business
of both governments on my doubting
whether my father would assist me in it
sir william said he would give me a
letter to him
in which he would state the advantages
and he did not doubt of prevailing with
him
so it was concluded i should return to
boston in the first vessel
with the governor's letter recommending
me to my father
in the meantime the intention was to
keep a secret
and i went on working with kymer as
usual the governor is sending for me now
and then to dine with him
a very great honor i thought it and
conversing with me
in the most affable familiar and
friendly manner imaginable
about the end of april 1724 a little
vessel
offered for boston i took leave of kymer
as going to see my friends the governor
gave me an ample letter saying many
flattering things of me to my father
and strongly recommending the project of
my setting up in philadelphia
as a thing that must make my fortune we
struck on a shoal and going down the bay
and sprung a leak we had a blistering
time at sea
and were obliged to pump almost
continuously
at which i took my turn we arrived safe
however at boston in about a fortnight
i had been absent seven months and my
friends had heard nothing of me
for my brother holmes was not yet
returned
and had not written about me my
unexpected appearance surprised the
family all
were however very glad to see me and
made me welcome
except my brother i went to see him at
his printing house
i was better dressed than ever while in
his service having a genteel new suit
from head to foot
a watch and my pockets lined with near
five pounds
sterling in silver he received me
not very frankly looked me all over and
turned to his work again
the journeymen were inquisitive